th his blade, and passed his sword through his body.  Jussac
fell like a dead mass.

D'Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field
of battle.

Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressed
him warmly.  Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, and
able to defend himself.

Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits.  Porthos had
received a thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through his
thigh.  But neither of these two wounds was serious, and they
only fought more earnestly.

Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but did
not give way a foot.  He only changed his sword hand, and fought
with his left hand.

According to the laws of dueling at that period, D'Artagnan was
at liberty to assist whom he pleased.  While he was endeavoring
to find out which of his companions stood in greatest need, he
caught a glance from Athos.  The glance was of sublime eloquence.
Athos would have died rather than appeal for help; but he could
look, and with that look ask assistance.  D'Artagnan interpreted
it; with a terrible bound he sprang to the side of Cahusac,
crying, "To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay you!"

Cahusac turned.  It was time; for Athos, whose great courage
alone supported him, sank upon his knee.

"S'blood!" cried he to D'Artagnan, "do not kill him, young man, I
beg of you.  I have an old affair to settle with him when I am
cured and sound again.  Disarm him only--make sure of his sword.
That's it!  Very well done!"

The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword of
Cahusac fly twenty paces from him.  D'Artagnan and Cahusac sprang
forward at the same instant, the one to recover, the other to
obtain, the sword; but D'Artagnan, being the more active, reached
it first and placed his foot upon it.

Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed,
seized his rapier, and returned toward D'Artagnan; but on his way
he met Athos, who during his relief which D'Artagnan had procured
him had recovered his breath, and who, for fear that D'Artagnan
would kill his enemy, wished to resume the fight.

D'Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to
leave him alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a sword
thrust through his throat.

At the same instant Aramis placed his sword point on the breast
of his fallen enemy, and forced him to ask for mercy.

There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat.  Porthos made a
thousand flourishes, asking Bicarat what o'clock it could be, and
offering him his compliments upon his brother's having just
obtained a company in the regiment of Navarre; but, jest as he
might, he gained nothing.  Bicarat was one of those iron men who
never fell dead.

Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish.  The watch might come
up and take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists or
cardinalists.  Athos, Aramis, and D'Artagnan surrounded Bicarat,
and required him to surrender.  Though alone against all and with
a wound in his thigh, Bicarat wished to hold out; but Jussac, who
had risen upon his elbow, cried out to him to yield.  Bicarat was
a Gascon, as D'Artagnan was; he turned a deaf ear, and contented
himself with laughing, and between two parries finding time to
point to a spot of earth with his sword, "Here," cried he,
parodying a verse of the Bible, "here will Bicarat die; for I
only am left, and they seek my life."

"But there are four against you; leave off, I command you."

"Ah, if you command me, that's another thing," said Bicarat.  "As
you are my commander, it is my duty to obey."  And springing
backward, he broke his sword across his knee to avoid the
necessity of surrendering it, threw the pieces over the convent
wall, and crossed him arms, whistling a cardinalist air.

Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy.  The Musketeers
saluted Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to their
sheaths.  D'Artagnan did the same.  Then, assisted by Bicarat,
the only one left standing, he bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one of
Aramis's adversaries who was only wounded, under the porch of the
convent.  The fourth, as we have said, was dead.  They then rang
the bell, and carrying away four swords out of five, they took
their road, intoxicated with joy, toward the hotel of M. de
Treville.

They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street
and taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end it
became a triumphal march.  The heart of D'Artagnan swam in
delirium; he marched between Athos and Porthos, pressing them
tenderly.

"If I am not yet a Musketeer," said he to his new friends, as he
passed through the gateway of M. de Treville's hotel, "at least I
have entered upon my apprenticeship, haven't I?"



6  HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII

This affair made a great noise.  M. de Treville scolded his
Musketeers in public, and congratulated them in private; but as
no time was to be lost in gaining the king, M. de Treville
hastened to report himself at the Louvre.  It was already too
late.  The king was closeted with the cardinal, and M. de
Treville was informed that the king was busy and could not
receive him at that moment.  In the evening M. de Treville
attended the king's gaming table.  The king was winning; and as
he was very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor.  Perceiving
M. de Treville at a distance--

"Come here, Monsieur Captain," said he, "come here, that I may
growl at you.  Do you know that his Eminence has been making
fresh complaints against your Musketeers, and that with so much
emotion, that this evening his Eminence is indisposed?  Ah, these
Musketeers of yours are very devils--fellows to be hanged."

"No, sire," replied Treville, who saw at the first glance how
things would go, "on the contrary, they are good creatures, as
meek as lambs, and have but one desire, I'll be their warranty.
And that is that their swords may never leave their scabbards but
in your majesty's service.  But what are they to do?  The Guards
of Monsieur the Cardinal are forever seeking quarrels with them,
and for the honor of the corps even, the poor young men are
obliged to defend themselves."

"Listen to Monsieur de Treville," said the king; "listen to him!
Would not one say he was speaking of a religious community?  In
truth, my dear Captain, I have a great mind to take away your
commission and give it to Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I
promised an abbey.  But don't fancy that I am going to take you
on your bare word.  I am called Louis the Just, Monsieur de
Treville, and by and by, by and by we will see."

"Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shall
wait patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty."


"Wait, then, monsieur, wait," said the king; "I will not detain
you long."

In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what he
had won, he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing
Charlemagne--if we may use a gaming phrase of whose origin we
confess our ignorance.  The king therefore arose a minute after,
and putting the money which lay before him into his pocket, the
major part of which arose from his winnings, "La Vieuville," said
he, "take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de Treville on an
affair of importance.  Ah, I had eighty louis before me; put down
the same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing to
complain of.  Justice before everything."

Then turning toward M. de Treville and walking with him toward
the embrasure of a window, "Well, monsieur," continued he, "you
say it is his Eminence's Guards who have sought a quarrel with
your Musketeers?"

"Yes, sire, as they always do."

"And how did the thing happen?  Let us see, for you know, my dear
Captain, a judge must hear both sides."

"Good Lord!  In the most simple and natural manner possible.
Three of my best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and
whose devotedness you have more than once appreciated, and who
have, I dare affirm to the king, his service much at heart--three
of my best soldiers, I say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made
a party of pleasure with a young fellow from Gascony, whom I had
introduced to them the same morning.  The party was to take place
at St. Germain, I believe, and they had appointed to meet at the
Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by De Jussac, Cahusac,
Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not go there
in such a numerous company without some ill intention against the
edicts."

"Ah, ah!  You incline me to think so," said the king.  "There is
no doubt they went thither to fight themselves."

"I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judge
what five armed men could possibly be going to do in such a
deserted place as the neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes."

"Yes, you are right, Treville, you are right!"

"Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, and
forgot their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majesty
cannot be ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king
and nobody but the king, are the natural enemies of the
Guardsmen, who belong to the cardinal."

"Yes, Treville, yes," said the king, in a melancholy tone; "and
it is very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France,
two heads to royalty. But all this will come to an end, Treville,
will come to an end.  You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a
quarrel with the Musketeers?"

"I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I
will not swear to it, sire.  You know how difficult it is to
discover the truth; and unless a man be endowed with that
admirable instinct which causes Louis XIII to be named the
Just--"


"You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, your
Musketeers.  They had a youth with them?"

"Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king's
Musketeers--one of whom was wounded--and a youth not only
maintained their ground against five of the most terrible of the
cardinal's Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them to
earth."

"Why, this is a victory!" cried the king, all radiant, "a
complete victory!"

"Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce."

"Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?"

"One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so
admirably on this occasion that I will take the liberty of
recommending him to your Majesty."

"How does he call himself?"

"D'Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends--the
son of a man who served under the king your father, of glorious
memory, in the civil war."

"And you say this young man behaved himself well?  Tell me how,
Treville--you know how I delight in accounts of war and
fighting."

And Louis XIII twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand
upon his hip.

"Sire," resumed Treville, "as I told you, Monsieur d'Artagnan is
little more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a
Musketeer, he was dressed as a citizen.  The Guards of the
cardinal, perceiving his youth and that he did not belong to the
corps, invited him to retire before they attacked."

"so you may plainly see, Treville," interrupted the king, "it was
they who attacked?"

"That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head.
They called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was
a Musketeer at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that
therefore he would remain with Messieurs the Musketeers."

"Brave young man!" murmured the king.

"Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so
firm a champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword
thrust which has made the cardinal so angry."

"He who wounded Jussac!" cried the king, "he, a boy!  Treville,
that's impossible!"

"It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty."

"Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?"

"Well, sire, for once he found his master."

"I will see this young, Treville--I will see him; and if anything
can be done--well, we will make it our business."

"When will your Majesty deign to receive him?"

"Tomorrow, at midday, Treville."

"Shall I bring him alone?"

"No, bring me all four together.  I wish to thank them all at
once.  Devoted men are so rare, Treville, by the back staircase.
It is useless to let the cardinal know."

"Yes, sire."

"You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it is
forbidden to fight, after all."

"But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary
conditions of a duel.  It is a brawl; and the proof is that there
were five of the cardinal's Guardsmen against my three Musketeers
and Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"That is true," said the king; "but never mind, Treville, come
still by the back staircase."

Treville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed
upon this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the king
respectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.

That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor
accorded them.  As they had long been acquainted with the king,
they were not much excited; but D'Artagnan, with his Gascon
imagination, saw in it his future fortune, and passed the night
in golden dreams.  By eight o'clock in the morning he was at the
apartment of Athos.

D'Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out.  As
the hour to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a
party with Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a
tennis court situated near the stables of the Luxembourg.  Athos
invited D'Artagnan to follow them; and although ignorant of the
game, which he had never played, he accepted, not knowing what to
do with his time from nine o'clock in the morning, as it then
scarcely was, till twelve.

The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together.
Athos, who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with
D'Artagnan to the opposite side and challenged them; but at the
first effort he made, although he played with his left hand, he
found that his wound was yet too recent to allow of such
exertion.  D'Artagnan remained, therefore, alone; and as he
declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it regularly
they only continued giving balls to one another without counting.
But one of these balls, launched by Porthos' herculean hand,
passed so close to D'Artagnan's face that he thought that if,
instead of passing near, it had hit him, his audience would have
been probably lost, as it would have been impossible for him to
present himself before the king.  Now, as upon this audience, in
his Gascon imagination, depended his future life, he saluted
Aramis and Porthos politely, declaring that he would not resume
the game until he should be prepared to play with them on more
equal terms, and went and took his place near the cord and in the
gallery.

Unfortunately for D'Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his
Eminence's Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his
companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised
himself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it.  He
believed this opportunity was now come and addressed his
neighbor:  "It is not astonishing that that young man should be
afraid of a ball, for he is doubtless a Musketeer apprentice."

D'Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed
his eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this
insolent speech.

"PARDIEU," resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, "look at me
as long as you like, my little gentleman!  I have said what I
have said."

"And as since that which you have said is too clear to require
any explanation," replied D'Artagnan, in a low voice, "I beg you
to follow me."

"And when?" asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.